---
title: Dinner.
author: Ali
layout: post
posterous_aef3040f45df4620aa487475e2845672_post_id:
  - 145621053
posterous_aef3040f45df4620aa487475e2845672_permalink:
  - http://ali-alkhatib.posterous.com/dinner-7092012
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
<div>
  Yesterday the ladies we employ at the house were given the day off, leaving us to prepare our own breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Breakfast was hectic and a lot of silverware and cups were left out. In hindsight, I realize that the ladies have probably been cleaning up for us this entire time. How they have patience for us is astounding.
</div>

<div>
  For dinner, Matt was in charge of buying the food and preparing food. Ryan and I joined him and Ana (who drove) to Cayambe where we bought groceries. Matt said that he was interested in Sofia (who, if she&#8217;s interested in anyone, has expressed interest in Matt). Bothering, but this is no new disappointment for me.
</div>

<div>
  Saturday night was eventful. Got drunk, danced, etc&#8230;
</div>

<div>
  After getting food, Ana&#8217;s arstruggled to get home to Cangahua up the steep mountains. When we reached the town, we came upon a parade which blocked all traffic, so we drove around and eventually drove off the road to take the long way back home.
</div>

<div>
  Cooking dinner was chaos (and my shirt was ruined), but it was worth it at 6:15 when we put food out. There should still be leftovers, but I wouldn&#8217;t be surprised if we served everything, and we made enough for almost twice as many people as we served.
</div>

<div>
  We had a late staff meeting to organize dig groups and I asked to be assigned to the lab, where I worked today. It felt good to get work done that I felt particularly suited to (making a digital XRF catalog). I hope I can continue working in the lab, if not with Angus studying the impact of the rose industry on the people here.
</div>
