---
title: D-Bro (7/16/2012)
author: Ali
layout: post
posterous_aef3040f45df4620aa487475e2845672_post_id:
  - 148341871
posterous_aef3040f45df4620aa487475e2845672_permalink:
  - http://ali-alkhatib.posterous.com/d-bro-7162012
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
After self-prepared dinner last night (french toast and eggs), the group of students staying at la Conventa played drinking games late into the night. I decided to turn in early because I was still feeling sick. 
This morning I woke up early and had some eggs prepared by Scott from Buffalo. Will and some others had arranged to visit a site with Dr. David Brown (formerly of UT at Austin), and they invited me, so I went. How often do you get to survey with David Brown? 
Despite being sick and the trip being rather rigorous &#8211; about an hour in rough mountain roads in the back of a truck followed by a steep hike up a mountin trail &#8211; I enjoyed the excursion very much. "D-Bro" (as we called him) drove like a maniac, even by Ecuadorian/Latin standards, and he led the pace for the hike. The man's age belies his youthfulness. 
Surveying was fantastic &#8211; and not just because the views were incredible. Seeing a potential new site &#8211; literally discovering a site right at that moment &#8211; was thrilling. I felt out of my depth, but this doesn't surprise me much since my area is Cultural Anthropology, not Archaeology. 
Getting back, being hungry, and waiting for dinner is/was less fun. I wouldn't mind fast-forwarding to tomorrow night (both to further reduce this sickness and to see others on the project again). 
I can feel myself losing patience with others on this trip, but I don't know if this is a culture shock or something more genuine; I feel like I'm justified in being annoyed with some self-aggrandizing, over-eager-to-please idiot singing all day and night. 
I'm pretty sure I hate when people sing out of nowhere regardless of where I am. 
I must sound like a scrooge. I should end on a positive note. 
I am excited to take a week off, then start at UC Irvine and hopefully get a new Macbook Pro with a "Retina Display".
