---
title: Pigs. (7/10/2012)
author: Ali
layout: post
posterous_aef3040f45df4620aa487475e2845672_post_id:
  - 145621011
posterous_aef3040f45df4620aa487475e2845672_permalink:
  - http://ali-alkhatib.posterous.com/pigs-7102012
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
<div>
  Today was my second day of lab/babysitting sick people so that Vanessa can hopefully get some work done. Yesterday&#8217;s catalog was easy &#8211; making a catalog of artifact fragments on which we&#8217;ll be doing XRF analysis (someday), but today I was tasked with cleaning the recent finds from the field, mostly ceramics caked in hard dirt.
</div>

<div>
  The weather here is best described as inconsistent, or perhaps consistently erratic. There&#8217;s no way of predicting what today&#8217;s climate will look like, so you&#8217;re supposed to prepare for a little bit of everything. In Spanish, the word to describe the drizzle which sometimes showers us with light rain is called &#8220;paramo&#8221;.
</div>

<div>
  Yesterday Matt, Sofia, others, and I considered places to go for our upcoming 3-day weekend. The other staff members mentioned going to various resort locations like Mindo or BaNos, but I&#8217;m not sure that I don&#8217;t feel like splitting from the group and going somewhere difficult on my own. I considered Colombia, but I&#8217;m on the fence because of the reported danger to American tourists. Then again, a guy&#8217;s gotta live, right?
</div>

<div>
  After lunch today my ceramics cleaning partner (Kenny) and I noticed a fire near the hacienda rooms, so we put the fire out. I should remind myself later to update my LinkedIn profile to say &#8220;Archaeologist, firefighter&#8221;.
</div>

<div>
  There&#8217;s some trouble with the databases, not just in that there are multiple databases but in that people are actually having trouble with them. I&#8217;m considering pushing to MySQL/PHP, which should be easier to use but might be harder to learn. I need to come up with a solution which is easy enough to learn.
</div>

<div>
  The pigs at this hacienda almost ate some of our ceramics. Stupid pigs.
</div>

<div>
  I can&#8217;t help but start to feel the impact of knowing that I won&#8217;t see some people back home very much (if at all). I don&#8217;t mind losing some people, but others&#8230;
</div>
