I feel like a lot of the stuff that I've been reading lately has been like "how to get people to edit on _____ more" but they all assume that you've got a user base of certain threshold size already. For that matter, they tend to assume that it's both quantitatively and qualitatively static (e.g. the community isn't growing or shrinking substantially, nor is the community becoming more jaded, irascible, rigidly structured* etc.).

Instead, what if we thought about community building and design as a more explicitly ongoing process? What design decisions do you need to make for a small community, and how do those need to *change* as the community grows and changes? What are the transition points and processes?

It seems like suddenly it becomes a bit of rocket science to design a community with the principles you want; you have to launch "optimally" and by design you need to change things constantly to keep pace with changes in the community. This seems daunting, but empirically it can be done (Facebook, Wikipedia, even Reddit and other sites have shifted culturally over time, sometimes losing and sometimes endearing members in the process).

Maybe the analogy is more like in Biology; you can't just throw two chemicals together and call it science (okay maybe you can. I don't know) - you have to grow a culture (pun seriously not intended) before you can run experiments on the culture (wherein you throw two chemicals together). Prepping the culture incorrectly will yield fundamentally useless results.