---
title: How to Deal with Depression (lol just kidding)
author: Ali
layout: post
---

I don't usually talk about depression or bipolar disorder, either in writing or informally,
for a few reasons.

For one thing, I worry that it's obnoxious to listen to me talk about things that have helped me,
what hasn't, how I deal with it, etc... because
someone might take this to mean that I think I have all the answers.
I know I don't.
And even if I did,
I wouldn't want to make someone feel like I was rubbing my well-adjusted life in their face.

But let's say that we all understand that I'm not offering some panacea to depression for all people everywhere.
Let's say we're all on the same page inasmuch as all I can offer is (a small part of) my story.
This makes me nervous for other reasons;
sometimes when I share my story with others, people latch on a bit and seem to look to me like I have answers for them.
Please don't look for advice from me on this stuff.
Don't think of me as a potential guide in this stuff.
That'd be a little like calling me captain of the ship because I'm holding on to a slightly bigger piece of driftwood.
We're both floating in the middle of the sea.

All of this is carefully avoiding the real reason I haven't written much about depression,
especially in the context of graduate school.
I don't know what to say.
Who cares that I've been dealing with depression for the better part of a decade?
What can I say that adds to the conversation?
What do people who are not depressed _not_ know about depression, that I could teach?
What could I say that might potentially offer a tiny nugget of something useful to someone dealing with it right now?

**What do I know about anything?**

Obviously this isn't helpful self-talk, but that's kind of the point.
Depression isn't some magical thing that inspires a flood of useful thoughts and helpful ideas.
Depression is a sludgy monster in the back of my mind that asks energy-sapping questions that make you doubt myself.
It weighs me down until I'm uncertain about everything that's good about me.
Then the questions that keep me up become statements.

_You're stupid._

_People only tolerate you because they have to._

_You're worthless._

_People's lives would be better without you in them._

Depression has a way of slowly eating away at me until I feel like I'm nothing.
I can't get out of bed, or I manage to get out of bed but only to eat and go back to sleep.
I find myself staying up all night trying to find something to distract me,
then I oversleep, feel miserable about waking up at 2 in the afternoon,
having missed a meeting with my advisor,
or a lecture for a class I need to ace to pass my breadth requirements,
or some other obligation.
Then I'll decide to stay home for the rest of the day, because
_nobody wants to see me anyway_.

---

Research itself doesn't make things much easier.
It's nebulous and frustrating.
We spend most of our time submitting things
(proposals, papers, etc...)
hoping that people will say "yes" ---
accepting a paper to a prestigious conference,
or accepting a proposal for a grant.

In HCI, paper submissions are reviewed in a double blind method, by which I mean that
the author doesn't get to know who the reviewer is, and the reviewer doesn't know who the author is.
In some sense this is helpful because
it prevents someone with an axe to grind from singling you out just because they don't like you.
But at CHI this last year, something like [75% of submissions got rejected][CHI acceptance rates].
CSCW has a similar acceptance rate.
In general, papers researchers write are rejected.
And with those rejections usually come various lists of things that the researcher has done wrong,
sometimes feeling like personal critiques,
often sent by an anonymous reviewer through a faceless system.


Grad school is also funny because the type of feedback we _do_ get seems to be curated to mess us up.
Your advisor and others will write letters of recommendation lauding your virtues, but
(in Computer Science and in most other fields where I've asked)
*you're never supposed to see those letters*.
<!-- The rationale I've heard makes enough sense, -->
<!-- but the only other time people formally comment on your quality as a researcher -->
<!-- is when you're submitting papers to conferences or proposals for grants. -->

<!-- In both cases, reviewers tend to be anonymous, and
in both cases, the odds of acceptance are overwhelmingly stacked against you.
At CHI this last year, something like [75% of submissions got rejected][CHI acceptance rates]. -->

So for me it's pretty salient that
all the formally defined places where people would write or say anything good about me
are withheld from me or at least very carefully rationed out.
Meanwhile,
all of the negative things get piped directly into my email inbox with the critics' names redacted.

_So that's cool._

<!-- So you don't get to see the _good_ things people write about you, and
you read _negative_ feedback from anonymous sources about your work disproportionately more often than positive feedback. -->

<!-- If you're a grad student and you're anything like me,
you've probably spent a lot of time 
 -->















[CHI acceptance rates]: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3027063&picked=prox&cfid=797910925&cftoken=10647445