---
title: Tech Forestry
author: Ali
layout: post
---

I've been reading about some stuff lately. I'm not totally sure how to characterize what I'm thinking about, but... at the most literal level, I guess I've been reading about scientific forestry. Hear me out.

Western European kingdoms at the end of the 18th century were obsessed with maximizing the production of timber. There just weren't enough trees to meet the enormous and escalating demand, but it was quickly becoming apparent that decimating the forest wasn't a good option either - you'd end up killing the goose, so to speak. So we needed to figure out how to maximally extract timber from forests while still maintaining the forest's production capacity, in some sense.

What resulted was a bizarre field that James Scott described as scientific forestry, and which he documented for all sorts of interesting decisions that were made to help make the world "legible". Just counting trees became this case study in how we simplify the world to facilitate quantifying it:

Trees are useful for lots of things: the branches that could be used for thatched roofs; the wildlife that could be hunted or fished or caught; the cover that could be used for refuge.
But these kingdoms didn't care about any of that - all that mattered was literally how many boards of timber they could export. And so they didn't estimate how many berries could be produced, or how many animals there were, or how much shrubbery existed. All of that stuff was already in the way - what good was quantifying it?

Okay, that's enough of that point (_for now_).

People came up with funny solutions to estimate how many trees of various size were in an uncountably large forest. One guy came up with a sampling method where he gave trained labelers known quantities of variously colored nails and told them each to take different representative samples of a much larger forest, labeling each tree they found with a nail whose color corresponded to its size (e.g. red means huge, yellow means medium, green means small). Then they'd count how many nails of each color each labeler returned with.

Sort of gives new meaning to "random forest classification".

Understand this: I can _feel_ your eyes rolling from the other side of the internet, and _I'm sorry_.

Okay, I digress (and I promise I won't make as many puns about "missing the forest for the trees" as this guy James Scott did). This was all in service to something much more involved.

What's interesting about all of this is the whole process in service to it - replacing all of the plant life in the forest with a single species, for instance - and using that standardization to enable all sorts of experimentation, management, reasoning, legibility, and more. But as Scott puts it, "a whole world lying 'outside the brackets' returned to haunt this technical vision."

Something about the way German forestry routinized and standardized nature (or rather, _tried to_ do those things) reminds me of the peculiar and sometimes bizarre ways that tech seems to try to make sense of our existence. And just as the hubris of forest management was nevertheless successful at screwing up the biodiversity of the whole ecosystem, I wonder if tech will nevertheless manage to warp and contort society even if we shrug off this trend of data mining, surveillance, and massive advertising.


## Turning nature into natural resources

Scott wrote this book between 1994 (when chapter 1 was first published) and 1998 (when the whole book was published), so to be clear, this discussion wasn't aiming to make sense of how Google (founded the year the book was published) or Facebook (which would be founded 6 years later) or YouTube (7 years) or Twitter (8) run things. But I couldn't help but think about the callous, oblivious, regimented ways that these companies try to partition, rearrange, and classify **people** to render them as **users** and make it easier to reason about and monetize them.

The way Scott describes things, various powers in the late 1700s and early 1800s tried to figure out ways to quantify the amount of _timber_ they potentially had. I'm using "timber" advisedly here; Scott makes it clear that the folks developing methods of estimating the size and scope of forests were distinctly **not** interested in aspects of life that were not "trees that could be turned into valuable lumber". That framing gave us the narrowing necessary to not be utterly overwhelmed by the world, but it also meant that we ignored all the other things you could use a forest for (branches as firewood, leaves as thatches for roofs, the space itself for refuge, etc...).

I don't know if you're making your own connections here, so I'll just do it: I couldn't help but think about how we (you know, _we_) have criticized YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, and others for thinking about us through this narrow slit of "user engagement". We're not just click-through machines, but the way these companies talk about us, you wouldn't know it. Perhaps it was necessary for these companies to avoid being overwhelmed by the complexities of human existence.

So it's one thing to be troubled by the systemization of the exploitation of the forests, and I think similarly people are variably upset about the fact that Facebook monetizes our existence and activity on their platforms (Insta, Facebook, Whatsapp, etc...) _at all_. But then Scott talks about another step in the evolution of scientific forestry: _the active management of the trees themselves_. Practitioners start felling trees, replanting them, clearing underbrush, eliminating pests, preventing the public from using them (to make charcoal, for instance), and more. The disorderly forest of various trees became a forest of "Normalbaum" - the _standard tree_ (often the Norway spruce and sometimes the Scotch pine, if you're interested) - and for decades we enjoyed unbelievably productive yields.

In some way, tech companies seemed to find that there were types of people (and ways of monetizing them) that were wildly lucrative. It was one thing when they were just making sense of us; it becomes another when they curated and sandboxed our lives. Facebook's one name policy severely disenfranchises many people who don't conform to a single type of existence. If you want to post photos, versus a short status update, versus a longer one, versus an update to your career, you know where to go (instagram, twitter, facebook, linkedin, in that order I hope). Those of us that exist in online platforms are probably meticulously managed by engineers in the ways that forestry scientists tended to their areas. 














