---
title: "Turmoil"
author: "Ali"
layout: "post"
---

It feels like the HCI community has been in turmoil for the past few years. Worse, it seems at least, than it has been historically. Or at least the contention is really, really well-documented now.

In one camp are people who approach HCI as a study of *design*.
A lot, but not all, of these researchers build systems and evaluate them.
Their "implications for design" sections are generally pretty earnest, and not written with begrudging admission that "this is what's necessary to get a paper into CHI".

In another camp are people who approach HCI as a study of *people*.
A lot, but not all, of these researchers study people who happen to exist in systems, and the systems themselves are almost incidental.
Certainly, the implications for design are peripheral compared to the real contribution:
underlying theory, or what their work says about how people *are*.

I'm painting with a broad brush here, because this is a blog post and also because cultures are so heterogeneous that I would spend the rest of my life cataloging all the nuance of the HCI community if I had to be exactingly accurate about all the heterodox researchers in our tent.
Everyone's special and unique, especially you.
You're more special than everyone.

It doesn't worry me that people are in different camps.
I mean, of course it's a little worrying, but this is one of the features on the landscape of HCI; people from very different intellectual backgrounds, with different values, with different goals, different methods of achieving those goals, and all that.
Of course it requires some translation for two people to have a conversation about what a "theory" is when one thinks a theory is an ontological framework and the other thinks a theory is a provable or disprovable proposition.
But that's the premise of every good sitcom.
One just wants to articulate a way of constructing and interpreting the world, and the other just wants to evaluate a postulation.
Hijinks ensue!

I digress - the thing that worries me is that people misunderstand or don't recognize that these camps exist, or have such a vague sense that these differing views exist that they don't appreciate the very real consequences of one subscription or the other.

I'm going to make a few arguments in this post:

1. A slippery handle of our history has made our grasp on what we **are** even slipperier.
2. Our misjudgment 