---
title: Let's Make a Website
author: Ali
layout: post
---

Stanford's [Ethnography Lab][] (new to Stanford!) hosted Brooke Erin Duffy last week to talk about some of the interesting things that came up in her work with YouTubers (more on that some other time maybe). During Q&A she mentioned that it can be invaluable to have an online presence, and I figured it might be helpful to compile some resources that might make it easier for researchers to make a site.

### Why though?

I think people like danah boyd and Zeynep Tufekci show by demonstration that an active online presence can capture the attention of the public and of others across academia by thoughtfully working through their ideas publicly. Reading their work has definitely challenged me to engage critically with the ideas they've presented, and I've found personally that writing ideas for "casual" public consumption (like on a blog, ie not a grant/fellowship/paper submission) can be unbelievably helpful to crystallize my thoughts about some problem. Or sometimes I realize that I don't have 10 pages of content to say about a topic, but I want to say **something** about it.

Anyway if you've read this far you're probably on board. Let's talk about some of your options

### Some Assumptions
Most of this page will assume you're using [GitHub Pages][]. I'll make some references to other setups you can go with, but I won't spend much time on them. If I find good resources for those alternatives, I'll try to link to them, but I think it's better if I stay focused on one path.




### Domains
**You don't need to register a domain**, but it's generally not expensive, and it makes telling people where to go to find your site easier.

I'd even go as far as to say that you might prefer **not** to register a domain (there are circumstances where you won't want one), but let's walk through what that might look like:

- `username.github.io` - I know CS PhD students in particular who use this as their domain. It's a really strong way to point out that you know how to use github (otherwise you wouldn't have gotten that far). it's also free, which is nice. If your github user name isn't professional, you might want to think about whether this is a good idea (and/or whether you want to change your user name). For the rest of this guide (mostly leaning on gu)

### Hosting
You're going to need to host things someplace. 



### Other Venues







[Ethnography Lab]: https://ethnographylab.stanford.edu/