---
title: "Quitting"
author: "Ali"
layout: "post"
---

Not so much writing this post, but everything about the subject has been something of a dark cloud following me around. I figure I should talk about why I left my PhD program and what I was feeling, in the off chance that someone else is feeling things and in the off chance that my words can help them figure out how to talk about it too.

The short version is that I was miserable, and the end slipped out of sight, and the financial, emotional, and physical tolls were starting to interfere with who I wanted to be. It wasn't that I stopped enjoying research, or mentoring, or talking with people about their work (and telling them how their work resonates with me) - I think I still do some of those things in various capacities (like on Twitter and elsewhere), and I hope I'll get the chance to do some of those other things in the future. And it wasn't that I wasn't able to handle the slog - I had been in it for a few years and was publishing; it was that I felt deeply uncomfortable doing the marathon with any notion of the finish line, or any end to it, somehow disappearing over the horizon. I could handle the precarity and discomfort and all of that, but I needed to have a plan for it to be finite, and I felt that stopped being the case. So I had to get out of there.

---

I feel like every graduate student could talk about the financial compromises we have to make by taking this career path, and in particular it feels pretty ungrateful to complain about the financial precarity of a PhD student in CS, who can get internships paying somewhere around $10k/month over the summers. But the fact is that housing in the bay area is expensive, and the stipends don't increase year-over-year at the same rate that campus rent increased, and some of the institutional aspects of being a PhD student made the financial toll difficult to continue shouldering.

I don't want to get into specific examples, but a problem that seemed to be common to lots of PhD students at lots of universities was that we often have to pay for conference registration, airfare, etc... out of pocket and then get reimbursed after the fact. This puts you into debt of varying subtotals cumulatively making $2000-3000 (conference, airfare, a cheap hotel or AirBnB, to say nothing of food and other expenses for that timespan). My arrangement was pretty generous, from what I've been told (we would get meals covered as long as we didn't get too extravagant), but the institutions and administrative hurdles to get reimbursed often meant that people would get their money back several months after the conference wrapped up. If you have that money, great; but my experience was that it was difficult to cover those costs and tread water for 2, 3, maybe 6, maybe 12 months until you get that money back.

I bring this up not to say that financial insecurity is a part of PhD life - I mean, it is, and that's shitty, but that's not the point I want to introduce. The point I want to introduce is that financial insecurity takes a toll on you, and it's a varying toll, and in particular if you grew up in a household with wildly varying means, and you've watched your parents' cards get declined, and their car repossessed, and the power shut off, even if you're in the same financial situation that others are in, you might find that you dwell on it more than is necessary or healthy. I certainly did (as is probably obvious lol). I was never in danger of my credit cards being declined, but it was on my mind in a way that robbed me of energy and brain cycles to think about the stuff I actually wanted to do: research. Sendhil Mullainathan has written about a cognitive tax that you experience of several IQ points (whatever that is) when you experience a preoccupation with scarcity. It's [an interesting read][scarcity mindset], and an even more interesting [conversation with Ezra Klein][cognitive cost of poverty] if you don't want to read.

All this is to say that this weighed on me the entire time that I was a PhD student, and administrative and institutional structures, to use the words a post-doc and good friend gave me, "were extremely brittle and always seemed to break against us". That got to me. I suspect that people with different lived experiences (in particular, childhoods) can experience uncertainty on various dimensions and stay pretty grounded - that wasn't me, really.

---

Then there was the emotional toll that this started to take. I want to be very careful with my words here, because the fear of getting this feeling across in the wrong way makes me extremely anxious. When I joined the group, there was 1 faculty member and something like 5 PhD students. The culture of the group was pretty clear within about an hour. That necessarily changed as the group hired more faculty, and as those professors recruited more PhD students.

I don't think this was bad - I feel generally positive about the people in the group - but the culture changed, and it changed in a more substantive way than a single hire or even two or three hires would normally affect a group, because we went from n=1 to n=4. Figuring out what the group's values were, what the group was about, even what the group collectively *knew* became something I would dwell on and feel pretty depressed about. To some extent, I felt drift that other people who finished their PhDs reported feeling - no group is the same at the end of one's program as it was at the beginning, when they joined. Some people drifted away and spent less time at their labs (which is convenient, because you often need to hide and finish your dissertation). This was on my mind a lot, sometimes fading into the background but sometimes brought to the foreground by an exchange here or there that would surface deeply different values and priorities. And, feeling uncertain about a shared foundation of what we all know, it got more difficult for me to express what I was feeling in a way that I was confident others would understand. There's something to a community having a shared vocabulary and body of scholarship: too much, and everyone's swirling in the same soup; too little, and we're all in a tower of babel, or something.

I won't dwell on this much more except to emphasize that this became a thing that I got entangled by, and it wasn't productive or constructive, and while numerous students tried to work with me to try to figure out what our identity is, these conversations never scratched the itch that I was trying to scratch. So there was that.

I won't belabor the point, but to reference an earlier post that I deal with depression, this wasn't helping, and it began to seem like being there might have been making things worse. This is another one of those lines for me: I can deal with the slog, but I need some sort of timeline; and I won't endure situations that are actively making depression worse.

---

The physical stuff isn't particularly interesting to me, except that it was very clear to see in a chart with little data points plotted and everything. I had lost a substantial amount of weight over the prior year as a result of an unsustainable amount of running, serving as an outlet to stave off the frustration and depression that I mentioned earlier. I was running several times a day, upwards of 50 miles per week, running myself into injuries, and running through them, and even at the time I knew that I needed to know that this would eventually stop. When it became unclear when or if I would finish, I had to decide with an indefinite amount of time like this. If I knew it would be 1 year, or 2, or 3, then I could at least reason about whether I had that much runway left physically to survive.

To use Silicon Valley jargon, my burn rate was too high and it wasn't clear when things would turn around, if ever. I decided rather than crashing into the ground, I had to leave.

---

I'm still trying to put into words what it felt like and how it feels. Climbing to the top of this tree was the thing I wanted to do since I was a kid. Earning a PhD, becoming a professor, getting to mentor people and do research and publish and hear about what people were working on, that was the only thing that stayed visible no matter how lost I got. Flunking out of high school, spending as long at a community college as I did at Stanford (technically, I think I spent more time in community college, to be honest), selling vacuums door to door and sweeping loading docks and all the odd jobs I had to make ends meet, climbing to the top of this metaphorical tree was the goal, and I could always see it in the distance. Everything was about getting to the tree and climbing it. I got that chance, I climbed, and then I fell out, and the fall was, to be honest, kind of terrifying. Once I hit the ground, I looked around and I looked at my hands and I saw and could feel that they were all torn up. I couldn't start climbing this tree again. I can't even imagine when these hands will heal enough for me to try. I figured it was time for me to move on, accept that this tree wasn't meant to be climbed by me, and figure out what I wanted to do once I got up there, anyway. Maybe I can do that someplace else. Someplace with stairs.


[scarcity mindset]: https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/sendhil/files/scientificamericanmind0114-58.pdf
[cognitive cost of poverty]: https://www.stitcher.com/podcast/the-ezra-klein-show/e/62124623