---
title: Funding Thoughts
---

I wanted to write a bit about how I think about funding, because when I was having a conversation about this with someone I realized I could be clearer about what motivating thoughts inform where my boundaries right now are. It's also one of the things I'm proud of with the Center for Applied Data Ethics and the Data Ethics Fellowships (more on that [here][data ethics fellowship announcement]), so there's that.

The gist is that I don't think funding is as simple as having a list of "do not take checks from these people" on a bulletin board behind the counter. My motivating principle is that there are all these stakeholders affected by decisions about who to take money from, and in varyingly direct and indirect ways you implicate the people who work for you in the decisions you make.

There's the most direct kind of implication - *your own* salary being paid in part or in whole by some organization you have a problem with. In a real way you need to deal with that.

There are other ways you can be implicated, though: maybe your paycheck doesn't draw from the source of funding that you take issue with, but the group *as a whole* benefits in a pretty substantial way from that tainted source. It might be comforting to say that you're not funded by some terrible company, but if the office you occupy is paid for by that company, or renovated or powered by that company, then arguably your presence in that role is enabled in some part by that money that you wouldn't have tolerated on your paycheck. Should you reject the whole opportunity on that basis? I don't know. But if you recognize it's a legible, comprehensible question, then you shouldn't deprive others of answering that question (even if you don't feel compelled to address it yourself).

I'm not suggesting that you make all these decisions unilaterally. You'll unravel pretty quickly trying to do that. It's also antithetical to the point of this post. The point of this post is that these are all discussions that everyone in the group has a stake in, and that stakeholders should have some degree of input into what kinds of decisions you make.

Stop trying to memorize all the problematic people and companies out there, and start thinking about the generative engine that keeps saying "ask the people who might be affected by this decision how they feel".

There are some conclusions you can draw from this that you need to make that kind of thing work. For one thing, people should probably be able to find out where the money is coming from and in what amounts. For another, I have to 


[data ethics fellowship announcement]: #