---
title: impostor syndrome
layout: post
---
I hear a lot about people feeling like they're failures, comparing themselves to others and thinking they're not moving as quickly as their peers or doing as well as their colleagues. Something that helped me a lot when I was in community college watching my friends succeed in ... let's say "more conventional ways" was to reframe the way I evaluated myself. I don't remember the name of the technique, but the basic idea was that I was evaluating my qualifications along one dimension, and that's too reductive. I watched friends go through their undergrads at prestigious universities (and one get a Rhodes scholarship, but in general they were all just doing really well) and I was looking at my own life thinking I was an enormous failure.

But that's just one dimension (the academic one), and not even the whole story. That Rhodes scholar went straight through his undergrad at Stanford to Oxford, but he probably didn't spend a few years exploring courses in various other fields trying to find the one that resonated with him. You can say he knew what he wanted to do before I did, but I would say I made *absolutely sure*. I flunked classes from Astronomy to Political Science just being thorough :p

There are lots of little anecdotes in my academic life that **collectively** make the experience unique. Nobody can take that away from me. Nobody can claim to have lived that exact life and done it better on all dimensions. But even if someone comes along and I think they can, I just have to expand the parameters. I've had a unique group of mentors who have shaped my perspective on things. I don't know anyone who's worked with the exact string of mentors that have influenced me. To the extent that they're unique, their influence on me has made a unique product. My perspective is the result of a little bit of an archaeologist named Sam Connell at Foothill, and Tom Boellstorff (and Judith Gregory) at UC Irvine, and Michael at Stanford. I know with relative certainty that nobody's had that exact "constellation" of experiences.

And this is all exclusively academic stuff. I know very very few people that sold vacuums door to door. I'm sure everyone has an odd job or two in their lives, but not this one specific one. Not on top of everything I just wrote about. I don't know anyone that worked part time while taking 30+ units in their undergrad to graduate "on time". It was brutal, but I know it gives me a unique perspective. I don't know exactly *what* that unique perspective is, but there's something there. No experience has absolutely no value.

I know lots of people who spent years in high school and community college doing community service on the weekends. There's a whole community of people in KEY Club, Circle K, Kiwanis, etc...

None of this is even bringing to the table the identity that I was born with. These are just the experiences I had. Being middle eastern, being born in the west, being born at the time I was born, etc... are all factors that I wasn't acknowledging. All of this stuff forms a perspective on problems that become vanishingly unlikely to replicate. Anyone can tackle the same problems I look at, but who brings this exact perspective to the table?

--- this was all a little solipsistic or self-involved or whatever, so looping it back...

When I talk about you to other people, it's the constellation of things you study that I talk about. It's that exact unique perspective that I tell people makes you awesome. It's the projects and papers you've done that both illustrate what you're interested in as well as inform the next one(s).